---
title: CS 490 - Information Systems Management
layout: toc
parent: Spring 2021
prof: Ahmed Ibrahim
---

# IS Management in the Global Economy

What is the meaning of information system (IS)?

Information systems are organization systems that is designed to collect data,
process data, store and distribute information. Normally the IS is collecting data,
then do some processing, e.g., calculations.

## Examples
An example of such IS is [QUEST - STUDENT INFORMATION SYSTEM](https://uwaterloo.ca/quest/).
What aspects does quest system provide? How can we tell if a system is good or bad? There's a measure. For now, let's examine it briefly.
- A good IS is good to manage, or high managibility: if there's a problem, then easy to detect, easy to adjust and so on.
- Reliable. As a user, we should rely on this system.
- Scalability. Configuration should be dynamically based on the number of users dealing with the system.
- Mobility. Simple access the system from different devices.

Other examples of IS that we have used
- self-check-in machines
- ATM machines
- driver's license, health card etc.
- Every website we login including facebook.

## Data vs. Information
**Data**: Streams of raw facts
representing events
occurring in an organizations
or a physical environment
before they have been
organized into a form that
people can understand and
use.

**Information**: Data that have been shaped
into a form that is meaningful
and useful to human beings.

*Why do we require information systems?*

Information systems
enable advances in
organizational
performance, enhance the
decision-making process,
and transforming business.

Consider an example.
How are information
systems transforming
business?
- X.com was one of the world's first
online banks (Nov. 99).
- Increase in use of wireless
technologies
- More company websites, more
online shopping
- Supply chain optimization and
just-in-time inventories
- E-commerce and Internet
advertising expand

## Successful IS

Successful information systems are a critical component of a successful business. But how could we assess the successfulness of IS? What is meant by successful IS?

An IS is not just computers. A successful information system consists of the correct tech, tools, methodologies, processes, and people.

## History
For 4000 years, writing
was the only information
technology people used,
but in the nineteenth
century during the great
industrial revolution
things start to change.

Joseph Marie Charles (7 July
1752 – 7 August 1834) invented the first programmable machine, which is used to fabricate silks, making silks with some patterns.

| Time Frame | Computer Use Trends     | Emerging Applications | Some Leading Vendors |
| :------------- | :------------- | :-- | :-- |
| 1950s |  Calculator  | Bookkeeping |     Texas Instruments |
| 1960s | Computer | Accounting, Payroll | IBM, CDC |
| 1970s | Management Information Systems | Financial Applications etc | IBM, Digital |
| 1980s | Decision Support and Applied Artificial Intelligence | Portfolio Management | IBM, Lotus |
| 1990s | Communicator | Office Automation, E-mail | IBM, Netscape |
| 2000s | Partnership | E-commerce, Mobile Computing | IBM, Oracle, SAP |

The mission of IS organization.
